---
layout: post
title:  "UVa 11130 - Billiard bounces"
date:   2016-12-25 13:15:00 -0600
categories: UVa
---

**Problem:** [Billiard bounces]

**Solution:**
At first I tried to solve this problem via direct simulation, but was
stuck in some weird errors due to floating point precision. So I
changed my way to approach this problem. 

If we use direct simulation, when a bounce happens, we flip the sign
of the velocity component which is perpendicular to the bounce surface,
and make no change to the component which is parallel to the bounce surface.
Instead of doing this, we can add a new billiard board beyond the
bounce surface. By doing this, the ball leaves the original board and
enters the new board, so we do not  need to change the velocity. 
This effectively reflects, or mirrors the board over the bounce surface,
hence having no influence on the number of bounces. 

By doing this, the ball travels in a straight line, and we do not even need
to calculate the time when bounces do happen. 
All we need to do is to calculate
the total distance the ball travels, and find how many vertical and 
horizontal walls the ball has passed through.


**Source Code:**
{% highlight C++ %}
{% raw %}
#include <bits/stdc++.h>

using namespace std;

#define PI acos(-1)

int main() {
    double a, b, v, A, s;
    while (scanf("%lf %lf %lf %lf %lf", &a, &b, &v, &A, &s) && a > 0) {
        double x = a / 2, y = b / 2;
        double vx = v * cos(A * PI / 180), vy = v * sin(A * PI / 180);
        double ax = -v / s * cos(A * PI / 180), ay = -v / s * sin(A * PI / 180);

        int vw = 0, hw = 0;

        double dx = vx * s + 0.5 * ax * s * s;
        double dy = vy * s + 0.5 * ay * s * s;

        vw = (dx + a / 2) / a;
        hw = (dy + b / 2) / b;

        printf("%d %d\n", vw, hw);
    }
    return 0;
}
{% endraw %}
{% endhighlight %}

[Billiard bounces]:https://uva.onlinejudge.org/index.php?option=com_onlinejudge&Itemid=8&category=24&page=show_problem&problem=2071
